docs: add decision record about event framework refactoring (#2570)
eclipse-edc/Connector: docs/developer/decision-records/2023-03-09-event-framework-refactoring/README.md

# Event Framework Refactoring

## Decision

This decision record covers the refactor and improvements of the Event Framework in two main aspects:

> - Simplify the definition and maintenance of event types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simplification of the event types.
```

- A new way of typed subscriptions based on event type.

The `Event` and the `EventPayload` will be merged together in the `Event` class representing the payload abstraction, while
a new concrete class `EventEnvelope` will be introduced for holding and dispatching the previously mentioned `Event`,

> and it will contain all the event metadata like id, timestamp, etc..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and it will contain all the event metadata like id, timestamp, etc.
```

> Additionally, we will introduce/refactor methods in the `EventRouter` and `EventSubscriber` for subscribing to events based on their kind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we will introduce/refactor methods in the `EventRouter` and `EventSubscriber` for subscribing to events based on the type they are parameterized with.
```

## Rationale

> From an EDC contributor prospective adding a new `Event` today requires to implement at least two classes, the `Event`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From an EDC contributor perspective, adding a new `Event` today requires the implementation of at least two classes, the `Event`
```

and the `EventPayload` with their builders.
While the hierarchy on the `EventPayload` is useful to express and abstract the event payload, the abstraction on the
metadata `Event` can be simplified, considering that events metadata rarely changes in terms of properties.

## Approach

The `Event` and the `EventPayload` classes will be merged together in an abstract class called `Event`, that all EDC
events should implement. The `Event` will represent the abstraction over the event payload carried by a new concrete class called `EventEnvelope` which will be generic over the `Event`.

Here's how the envelope will look like:

```java
public class EventEnvelope<E extends Event> {

    private String id;

    private long at;
    private E payload;
    ...

    // Builder
}
```

> When creating a new event in EDC the only class to extend is `Event` and all current EDC events needs to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a new event in EDC the only class to extend is `Event` and all current EDC events need to be
```

migrated to the new shape.

For example the `AssetCreated` could be:

```java
public class AssetCreated extends Event {

    private String id;

    // Builder
```

> The signature of the `EventRouter#publish` also need to change for taking in input the `EventEnvelope`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The signature of the `EventRouter#publish` also needs to change in order to accept an `EventEnvelope`:
```

```java
public interface EventRouter {

>     void publish(EventEnvelope event);

Reviewer 2: This should be generified

        .payload(AssetCreatedNew.Builder.newInstance().id("id").build())
        .build();
    eventRouter.publish(event);
}
```

For introducing the typed subscribers the interfaces for registering and handling events also needs to be changed.

The `EventSubscriber` will change as follows:

```java
public interface EventSubscriber<T> {
    void on(EventEnvelope<T> event);
}
```

And the `EventRouter#register/{async}` method will take in input:

- the type of the event that the subscriber is interested in
- the subscriber itself

```java
public interface EventRouter {
    <E extends Event> void register(Class<E> eventKind, EventSubscriber<E> subscriber);
}
```

The default router `EventRouterImpl` and other implementors should take into account the events hierarchy
when registering subscribers and dispatching events, considering that the base event class will be `Event`.

For example if a subscriber is interested in all events, an `EventSubscriber` dealing with the `Event.class` type can be used.

The polymorphic subscribers should work also with custom hierarchy of events. If we consider the current `Asset` events
we could model them in the following way:

```java

> public class AssetEvent extends Event {

Reviewer: just a nit, but: 
```suggestion
public abstract class AssetEvent extends Event {
```
